In the dense forests of Bagulpur, a Santhal leader named Tilka Manjee rose to defend his people's land and dignity.
Tilka Manjee belonged to the Santhal community in the Bagulpur region where customary land rights and forest access had sustained families for generations.
By the late 1700s the East India Company's revenue demands and outsider land claims disrupted these rhythms.
Outraged, Tilka rose as a leader who could read both the forest paths and the resentment of his people.
He organized vans of Santhal hunters and cultivators into mobile groups that could strike quickly and vanish into the woods.
Their weapons were bows, spears and intimate knowledge of terrain, not the muskets of the company, but advantaged through surprise and unity.
In several daring attacks local British officers were wounded and supplies seized to feed families that had been stripped by taxes.
The company responded with a combination of punitive expeditions and promises, but the asymmetric nature of the conflict worked for a time in Tilka's favor.
For the villagers his actions were both practical, a way to get food and arms, and symbolic, a refusal to accept loss of land and livelihood without fight.
Faced with overwhelming military resources and betrayed in one engagement, Tilka was captured, tried by colonial authorities, and executed.
Yet his story did not vanish.
In tribal memory Tilka Manjee became a martyr, a clear example that resistance existed long before the larger national movements and that tribal communities had their own long struggle against exploitation.
Though he was executed, Tilka's courage blazed a trail of resistance that still inspires generations.
To know more history facts, please subscribe.